UI patterns - Navigation (#744)
primer/design: content/ui-patterns/navigation.mdx

<!-- TODO: ask an engineer to confirm this is technically accurate -->
In GitHub's single-page app architecture, this behavior is emulated without a traditional page reload.

If you're navigating from a parent page to a child page, the child page should have a clear way to navigate back to the parent page. This is often done with [breadcrumbs](/components/breadcrumbs) or a "back" button.

</Box>

<CustomVideoPlayer
  width="456"
  loop
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/2313998/6d8008b5-bc5a-4f21-ba14-ac57550b2de3"
/>

</Box>

For example, when adding a new Codespace secret, the user is taken to a new page to fill out the secret details. There is a breadcrumb at the top of the page letting them go back to the Codespace settings page.

Be mindful of data loss when a user is navigating away from a page where they have unsaved changes. See the [saving](/ui-patterns/saving) guidelines for more info on handling unsaved changes.

### Same page, different state

<Box display="flex" flexDirection={['column', 'column', 'column', 'column', 'row']} sx={{alignItems: 'flex-start', gap: 3}}>

<Box flex={1}>

> When users activate a different state of their current page. When using this kind of navigation, strive to avoid full page reloads when feasible. This could help maintain a fast and smooth user experience.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: user activated a different state of their current page. 

When using this kind of navigation, strive to avoid full page reloads when feasible. This could help maintain a fast and smooth user experience.

```

These sections feel a little bit awkward with the heading and first sentence kind of describing the heading 🤔 this is a nitpick. But I'll try and suggest what I think would make sense and feel free to ignore!

The URL may or may not change.

</Box>

<CustomVideoPlayer
  width="456"
  loop
  src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/2313998/bbd4675d-546f-4f7d-9736-8b6419ed54c5"
/>

</Box>

### New spot on the same page

<Box display="flex" flexDirection={['column', 'column', 'column', 'column', 'row']} sx={{alignItems: 'flex-start', gap: 3}}>

<Box flex={1}>

> When users navigate to a different section or move focus to a specific element within the same page. The page content is not changed. This behavior is commonly used for scrolling to new sections or focusing on input fields.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Example: User navigated to a different section or moved focus to a specific element within the same page. 

The page content is not changed. This behavior is commonly used for scrolling to new sections or focusing on input fields.

```

<Box flex={1}>

Breadcrumbs show the user where they are using a hierarchical list of links. Going from start to end, each link is one level of hierarchy deeper.

Activating a breadcrumb item should change the URL.

[Breadcrumbs component guidelines](/components/breadcrumbs)

</Box>

<img
    width="456"
    alt="Screenshot of files page breadcrumb"
    src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/2313998/2a8aa05b-b406-44f8-9f8d-5f621fcad221"
/>

</Box>

### Pagination

<Box display="flex" flexDirection={['column', 'column', 'column', 'column', 'row']} sx={{alignItems: 'flex-start', gap: 3}}>

<Box flex={1}>

Pagination is used to sequentially navigate long collections of content that's been broken into smaller chunks.

Activating a pagination item should change the URL.

[Pagination component guidelines](/components/pagination)

</Box>

<img
    width="456"
    alt="Screenshot of issues page pagination"
    src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/2313998/7052c7d9-1e7a-41c1-8854-f85630c92df2"
/>

</Box>

### Segmented control

<Box display="flex" flexDirection={['column', 'column', 'column', 'column', 'row']} sx={{alignItems: 'flex-start', gap: 3}}>

<Box flex={1}>

> While primarily used to make a selection from a short list, segmented controls can be employed as navigation components for **filtering**, **sorting**, or **viewing content in a different format**.
> 
> When being used as navigation, activating a segmented control option may or may not change the URL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While primarily used to make a selection from a short list, segmented controls can be employed as navigational components for **filtering**, **sorting**, or **viewing content in a different format**.

When being used for navigation, activating a segmented control option may or may not change the URL.
```

    src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/2313998/f7fb7251-f9bf-4d58-b6ec-16b66f3959da"
/>

Tabbed interfaces enable seamless navigation between different subpages within a unified context. Tabs go directly above the content they affect.

### Headings and hierarchical page sections

<img
    width="960"
    alt="Wireframe of a settings page with multiple nested sections"
    src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/2313998/88dedda4-355c-48ba-af14-9c01934dd276"
/>

A [page header](/components/page-header) is the title area at the top of the main content region that shows the user where they are. It may also to contain navigational elements like breadcrumbs or a link to go up a level of hierarchy.

Use section headings to show the user where they are in the context of the page. These headings should be styled to reflect their hierarchy within the page. Page section headings should be marked up with the appropriate heading level (`h3`–`h6`).

See our [typographic style options](/primitives/storybook/?path=/story/typography-functional--overview) for heading styles.

## Accessibility

### Skip links

> Facilitate efficient navigation for screen reader users by including skip links to bypass dense redundant content and navigate directly to essential sections.

Reviewer 2: Do we have an a11y article on `skip links` to link to?

Author: Hmm maybe? @ericwbailey - do you know?

Reviewer 3: Here's a couple:

- [Incorporating Skip to Main Content Links for Better Website Accessibility - The A11Y Collective](https://www.a11y-collective.com/blog/skip-to-main-content/)
- [How-to: Use skip navigation links - The A11Y Project]

Author: So it looks like we don't have anything internal. @lukasoppermann - do you think it's worth linking to one of these external articles?

Reviewer 3: I'm also happy to write up some internal documentation, if y'all find it helpful!

Example for skipping dense content: there is a skip link near the header of a data table that allows users to skip over the large amount of content often rendered in a data table.

### Tab order

Users should be able to tab through the navigation elements in a logical order. The tab order should reflect the visual order of the elements.

### Scannable headings

A correct heading structure is critical for enabling users to navigate quickly within a page. Headings are by far the most common navigation technique for screen reader users.

Follow our accessibility [guidelines for headings](/guides/accessibility/headings).

## Related links

- [Action menu](/components/action-menu)
- [Breadcrumbs](/components/breadcrumbs)
<!-- markdownlint-disable GH002 "Avoid using generic link text" - "Link" is actually the name of the component -->
- [Link](/components/link)
- [Pagination](/components/pagination)
- [Segmented control](/components/segmented-control)
- [Underline nav](/components/underline-nav)
- [Underline panels](/components/underline-panels)

> 

Reviewer: Did you mean to have a space here? It looks kinda funny in the deploy but not sure..

<img width="487" alt="related links section" src="https://github.com/primer/design/assets/18661030/97363d6f-85f7-43b7-91d5-55e3c0fa3f06">

Author: Oops - that's just a rogue return. Will remove.

- [Action menu](/components/action-menu)
- [Breadcrumbs](/components/breadcrumbs)

> <!-- markdownlint-disable GH002 "Avoid using generic link text" - "Link" is actually the name of the component -->

Reviewer 2: 🤣
